[SPEAKER_02]: Hello
[SPEAKER_02]: and welcome to Veterans of the Valley. I'm Tom Turbyville. gary banta has lived in the brazos valley since 1982. he was
born in brownfield texas grew up in kansas and after high school and working for a time he joined the army in 1967 that was
[SPEAKER_02]: well into the vietnam war that's where he both drove and rode shotgun on truck convoys delivering supplies to the hot
spots where choppers and aircraft could not land yes it was a year tour that was quite dangerous but he survived it
[SPEAKER_02]: without any serious wounds He will talk to us about his time in Vietnam, and then later his duty at Fort Knox, where he
indeed saw the gold, and later as a chaplain's assistant in Germany. And he's here to talk proudly about the work of the
[SPEAKER_02]: American Legion, Earl Graham Post 159, of which he is now the commander. Please welcome Gary Banta to Veterans of the
Valley. Gary, it is a pleasure to have you here, and thank you for your service, and especially to the American Legion,
[SPEAKER_02]: which we're going to talk about a lot here in a little bit. But let's talk about sort of you were born in Texas, you grew up in
Kansas, and it wasn't long after high school, after working for a while, that you decided to join the Army. Sort of talk
[SPEAKER_02]: about that transition from boyhood into the Army. Well, I grew up in Coldwater, Kansas. And after high school, moved
back to Texas and went to work on a road job at Lake Meredith, up close to Borger. And it was awfully cold. And the Vietnam
[SPEAKER_00]: War was on. And at that time, it had not become unpopular. So I felt like I wanted to go in the military. And so I joined and
was sent to Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri for basic training and then on to other duties. Yeah, you told me, I guess you
[SPEAKER_02]: joined up in Amarillo and while most of the people were sent to Fort Bliss where it was warm, you couldn't get out of the
cold, right? Yeah. You were sent to Missouri. I've been working in ice and cold up there in Amarillo and thought I'd try to
[SPEAKER_00]: go to Bliss to get basic and they sent me to Fort Leonard Wood. A heavy vehicle operator, that's what you were trained in,
but you never really did that until you got to Vietnam. And let's go ahead and talk about that because we've got a lot to
[SPEAKER_02]: talk about today. April 1st, April Fool's Day of 1968 was the day that you went in country. Talk about your first tour of
duty in Vietnam and being on a convoy and sort of what all that involved. Okay. I landed at Cam'ron Bay. It was a reception
[SPEAKER_00]: center for incoming people coming to Vietnam. And there were a number of them, but that's where I went. And I stayed there
for a day or two until I found out what unit I would be going to and then went to Da Nang. and was assigned for a short period of
[SPEAKER_00]: time with an ordinance company, and I wasn't there, but just a few weeks, and then on up across, up into the northern part
of Vietnam, into I Corps, with the 1st Air Cavalry Division. 101st Airborne was there, 25th Armored Cavalry. This is in
[SPEAKER_00]: Phu Bae, northern part of Vietnam. That's right. Phu Bae is a southern suburb of Hue, Citadel City. And that battle had
been going on and was just ending when I got there. Right. And for the rest of your duty, you ran convoys. That was your job.
[SPEAKER_02]: I want you to talk about that a little bit more specifically. Talk about what that involved. You drove some, but mostly
you would ride a shotgun with an M60. M60. Talk about the need for convoys, talk about the effect of convoys, what it did,
[SPEAKER_02]: and this brought on some pretty dicey situations for you. Sure did, sure did. Convoys, the supply depot was at a place
called Tan Mai. It was a deep water pier at the mouth of the Perfume River. The Perfume River runs through Hue, but at the
[SPEAKER_00]: mouth of that river is a deep water pier, and everything that came into Vietnam came in through that deepwater pier. All
the supplies. All kinds of supplies. Every kind of thing you could imagine, all the way from bullets to biscuits.
[SPEAKER_00]: Whatever came in, came in there. And I would say the majority of the time, we were hauling just the everyday things of
life, trying to provide even plywood and things like that. But during the times when it got really serious, we were
[SPEAKER_00]: hauling ammunition, powder, rockets, every kind of thing you can imagine in support of these fire bases. And that's
where the bad part of my tours are. Not that that was all of it because we got mortared nearly every night or rockets or
[SPEAKER_00]: something every night, but those convoys where we would go out to that to Tanmay and pick up those loads of ammunition or
whatever we were taking inland. And those were usually night convoys, run at night. And I don't know if you know how that
[SPEAKER_00]: works, but there are no lights. All you have is on the rear of the vehicle in front of you are two triangles about the size of
a dime. And when they light up red, that brakes are on when they're white, he's running. And that's all you've got to look
[SPEAKER_00]: at. And it's terrifying because In the middle of that, you're going to get shot at. Right. It's going to happen. And the
thing that you most feared is being stopped. Stopped. Because the VC would stop you by any means necessary, whether it
[SPEAKER_02]: would be roadside mine or grenade launcher. That's right. Or whatever. RPGs. And that happened. It did. It did happen.
It did happen. And generally, you would dismount, take your M60 off the truck, and the driver and the gunner would get
[SPEAKER_00]: underneath the engine block of the truck. And we did that several times. Right. And prepared to defend the position.
Yeah. You know, I guess probably not much different than what goes on. But we didn't see any IEDs. Right. There wasn't any
[SPEAKER_00]: of that. Right. Now, these were five and a half ton trucks, right? Five ton trucks. And we had in the convoys, especially
those that were loaded with ammunition, we would have a five ton truck that had inch plate steel on it. Mm-hmm. And in the
[SPEAKER_00]: back of that was a quad 50. That's four 50 caliber machine guns, electrically operated. There would be three of those in
the convoy, then Jeeps that moved all through the convoy with two M60s on them. So we had a lot of firepower, but sometimes
[SPEAKER_00]: you needed it. Right. August of 1968, you talked about one operation called Massachusetts Stryker. That's right. That
was probably the, there were several weeks there that I, you know, I don't even really remember. It was such a blur
[SPEAKER_00]: because it was 24 hours a day. We never stopped. I mean, you'd sleep where you could sleep. But we would run out to the deep
water pier, pick up ammunition, and that was so dangerous carrying that powder because one tracer into a truckload of
[SPEAKER_00]: powder and that truck was gone. And it did happen. It just didn't happen to me. But during the Massachusetts striker, the
enemy in the Ashaw Valley were making a resurgence. And this is after Kason and after the Tet Offensive in play, they were
[SPEAKER_00]: trying to recapture their stronghold in the Ashaw Valley. The Massachusetts striker was designed to beat them back. We
hauled ammunition to these fire bases, Birmingham, Bastogne, and Geronimo. And oftentimes, they would fire the
[SPEAKER_00]: ammunition off the vehicles. I mean, they'd break the bands on 175, 155 howitzers and fire it right off the trucks. And it
was pretty spectacular. Right. And when you had to fire your weapon, that would light up. They know where you are. You
[SPEAKER_00]: didn't want to pull the trigger on an M60 until you had to. Right. And once you did that, they definitely knew where you
were. The difference is our tracers were red and theirs were green. So you knew when they were coming, you knew you were
[SPEAKER_00]: being shot at for sure. When you think about what you did and how often you ran these convoys and how you ran them and how
often you did meet resistance, you were never wounded. You caught some shrapnel in the knee one time. Yeah, one time. And
[SPEAKER_02]: it was taken out just. A medic took it out. A medic took it out. Never reported, so no Purple Heart. But you have to feel very
blessed and very fortunate that you came back with that wound. Yeah, I am. So many people didn't. I know many people that
[SPEAKER_00]: were hurt badly, and I know some that were killed. And there are some that were killed that I don't know that were killed.
So it was a bad time. I want to talk about the nature of this convoy again. You were telling me the other day that you were
[SPEAKER_02]: talking about Route 1 and it runs the entire length of Vietnam. That's right. All the way from the Mekong Delta to the DMZ.
And eventually you quit running sort of convoy style because that's when you would get stopped and you'd run the trucks
[SPEAKER_02]: one at a time. One at a time. And that would begin at Hue going north toward Dong Ha. Because the VC wouldn't waste their...
They were less apt to try to stop one truck. They would shoot at you. I mean, you'd be driving on Route 1 and you'd see the
[SPEAKER_00]: machine gun bullets striking the rice paddy coming toward you. And then they'd pass in front of you or hit your truck. But
you're just running wide open as fast as that truck would go. Yeah, that's what I wanted to talk about because sometimes
[SPEAKER_02]: these convoys would be up to 20 trucks. And it wouldn't be like a slow-moving convoy. No, we'd be flying. You wouldn't
catch the one in front of you and the one behind you wouldn't catch you. You'd be flying to get from where you were to where
[SPEAKER_02]: you were going as fast as you could. As fast as you could roll it. And sometimes that meant having to deal with Vietnamese
vehicles. They would have these buses loaded with ducks and geese and 300 people. And it was always very dicey because
[SPEAKER_00]: you didn't want them stopping you or slowing you down. And if they tried to slow you down or it appeared they were trying to
slow you down, then it would make you think, you know, that they're trying to set me up and there's been more than one
[SPEAKER_00]: Lombro bus get pushed off road at 70 miles an hour. I hope nobody got hurt, but that's what they did. And that's what I did.
And these weren't paved highways. These were dirt roads. No, but Route 1 was completely paved. Right. And if when you got
[SPEAKER_00]: off Route 1, then you began to worry about mines. Because on Route 1, they couldn't mine an asphalted road. And the areas
when they would repair them in the mornings, engineers would run mine sweeps on that section while they were repairing
[SPEAKER_00]: the road. So you'd be safe on Route 1, as long as you're on that asphalt. So the Ashaw Valley was pretty... It was pretty
complete with mines. I mean, they were pretty much everywhere. Once you passed into the Ashaw Valley, you were
[SPEAKER_00]: definitely in enemy territory. I asked you the other day, were you afraid? And tell me what your answer was. You said you
were afraid, but you weren't terrified. I was afraid, but I was not terrified. I was young. And I guess I had confidence
[SPEAKER_00]: that I'd been trained well enough to do what I was supposed to do. I just was not terrified. I was afraid. I mean, when
mortars are falling around you, a man would be a fool to say that he wasn't afraid. Yeah. But I wasn't terrified, nor was I
[SPEAKER_00]: ever not able to think clearly. Right. You talked about one time about going to get some bread and the convoy took off
without you. Yeah. Tell us that story. That was foolish. Of them or you? Of me. Of me. It was a really crazy thing I did.
[SPEAKER_00]: Vietnamese had these little carts, and they made bread. And we were in Hue waiting at a night convoy. And, of course, I was
hungry. I don't know if you've ever tried to live on sea rations, but if you could get any kind of food, real food. So I saw
[SPEAKER_00]: this bread thing up the street, and it was, I don't know, not more than a block. And I had a, Fritz was his name. He was a new
guy in the country, and he was driving the truck. I said, Fritz, stay right here. I'm going to run up there and get some of
[SPEAKER_00]: that bread. And he said, oh, don't do that, Ben. And I said, yeah, I'm going to go. So I took off. Well, I didn't get started
good, and I hear them take off. I hear the trucks taking off. So I ran to this fella and I got the bread and gave him some MPC, I
[SPEAKER_00]: don't know how much, whatever I gave him and ran back. Well, the time I got back, the trucks were going around the corner,
oh, maybe two or three blocks down, going around the corner. Well, you don't just, and we had a heavy load, so you don't
[SPEAKER_00]: just start off, take off real fast. So in a little bit, we're flying. And it's dark and we can't see anything. And we're
trying to look for these white triangles that'll be in front of us, right? Because there's no lights. We're flying this
[SPEAKER_00]: as fast as we can go. And we passed the Catholic church. I think you'll show a picture of that Catholic church. We passed
that Catholic church. And just shortly after you passed that, there's a bridge. And the Vietnamese were protecting
[SPEAKER_00]: that bridge. If you didn't guard the bridges, they'd just blow them up. So they had... bunkers all around that bridge and
they had just pulled all the Constatina wire back across the road and we came around that corner and there's all that
[SPEAKER_00]: Constatina wire and we hit it at about 70 miles an hour. Oh my goodness. Constantino wire, and it took me days to get all
that wire out of the axles of that truck, but we didn't stop. You mentioned the picture, so let's go ahead and go to some
[SPEAKER_02]: photographs right now, as a matter of fact, because we've got some to look at from your collection. The first picture is
going to be of you just very soon after. There it is right there. This is pretty soon after you arrived in country. Yeah, I
[SPEAKER_00]: hadn't been there more than maybe a week or 10 days at most. You see, I've got an M14. And it was pretty strange to get an M14,
but that's what I was issued. But they shortly took those up and gave us M16s. This is an M60? Yeah, that's an M60. That's
[SPEAKER_00]: our perimeter at Fubai looking toward the South China Sea. I don't know why I took that picture, even if I did take that
picture, but at nighttime, the direction that guns pointed was a fearful place because you didn't know what was out
[SPEAKER_00]: there. Okay. How about the rifle that you're holding? That's a Chinese Chi-Com bolt-action 7.62 by 51 millimeter rifle
with a bayonet. It's not even a semi-automatic. I don't know where I found it. I have no idea, but I found it. I had plans to
[SPEAKER_00]: bring it home, but somebody got it or took it away from me or maybe they, I don't know what happened to it. But you got a
picture of it. I got a picture of it. There you go. There you go. Talk about this picture. It's pretty fascinating. Well,
[SPEAKER_00]: you see a bridge there. That's at Anli. That's between Quantry and Huey. And they've blown up that bridge. The North
Vietnamese blew it up. And so they're reconstructing it, the engineers are, and the Seabees. And so our convoys would go
[SPEAKER_00]: into the river and drive that river. And that's not as deep as it got. It would get up to where it would nearly be to the
windows on those trucks. But the exhaust is up high enough that you could drive through there. And you always had a raft of
[SPEAKER_00]: kids around you. They would disappear from everywhere, just like they do in any war, I think. And we'd feed them, give
them candy or whatever we could give them. I had a group in Way that I took care of for my tour over there that always, when I
[SPEAKER_00]: got a chance to get them something special, I got it. Okay. This is a fantastic picture of a That's a fire base. That's a
Marine fire base called GLA. And this is an outpost that I'm at up on top of this mountain. And I'm on guard duty because
[SPEAKER_00]: that's what I'm doing up there. I'm going up for guard duty and it's going to get night. And our job is to protect the men
that are sleeping down there in those hooches that you see. My hooch was directly behind me down below. Like I say, I
[SPEAKER_00]: wasn't there, but just a short time. I kind of wish I could have stayed there because... So this photograph is pretty soon
after you arrived in country. I hadn't been there very long. We're going to see a photograph towards the end of your tour
[SPEAKER_02]: here in a minute. But right here, I think we have a picture coming up. That's what the convoy looked like. I don't know what
we've got there, but we're loaded down with something. And we're going somewhere, but I don't even know where that is. I
[SPEAKER_02]: just want people to see an idea of what we were talking about when we talked about the convoy with the five-ton trucks. And
then I think, now there you are towards the end of your tour, and not a lot of meat on those bones. You're on the left. No, it
[SPEAKER_00]: took me a... It was hard on me. I lost a lot of weight. We didn't eat very much or very often, and what you got was sea rations.
It wasn't a mess hall. And that's you and two other Texans, right? Yes, sir. That's Jerry Smith on the right, Greg Mahoney
[SPEAKER_00]: in the middle, and myself on the left. There was another guy. There were four of us Texans in the same hooch. His name was
Goodrich, and he was from College Station, but he was killed there. And I don't know that I even have a picture of him.
[SPEAKER_00]: Here's a picture coming up of LZ Birmingham. That's LZ Birmingham. That's in the Asho Valley. Most people think of
Vietnam as a jungle, but in the Asho Valley, it's mostly scrub type chenry. That's a lot deeper than it looks. I mean, if
[SPEAKER_00]: you're looking at it, it looks like that's not very deep, but that chenry is 12, 15 feet tall. So it's pretty thick, but not
as lush and green as most people would think. And you mentioned the church, the Catholic Church. Yeah, that's the
[SPEAKER_00]: Catholic Church in Hue. I thought it was a remarkable building there in Hue. I don't know if that exists today or not, but
it did then, and I thought it was remarkable. Fascinating pictures. You came back in April of 1969, rank of E4. Assigned
[SPEAKER_02]: to the commanding general's office, General John J. Sutherland, at Fort Knox, Kentucky, and you You pride yourself as
being one of the few people that have seen the gold at Fort Knox, right? I don't know what percentage of Americans or how
[SPEAKER_00]: many, if you said one out of 10,000 or 100,000.
[SPEAKER_00]: But as a driver for a lieutenant general, which three-star general, when he went there, I, of course, had the
opportunity to go in, too. So I've been in it twice. I've seen the gold. I don't know how much gold there now, but there was
[SPEAKER_00]: sure a lot of gold there in 1969. That was a fascinating tour. General Sutherland asked you where you wanted to go. You
didn't want to go back to Vietnam. Spain was your first choice. He couldn't help you there, but he sent you to Holland. And
[SPEAKER_02]: then eventually, and the place you were in Holland was sort of a relay station type of thing for Vietnam, communication
for Vietnam, right? Yeah, it was shortwave radio connection, and it was all, of course, encrypted. And I was assigned
[SPEAKER_00]: there, and there were 23 Americans at the Pine Concern in Maastricht in the Netherlands. Right. There for six months and
then to a Baptist retreat in Mannheim, Germany, where you were a chaplain's assistant. Talk about that duty. Well, I had
[SPEAKER_00]: gone, we went and had a Baptist retreat at Berstischgarten, which is the Oberst Salzburg, Hitler's retreat. And we went
to the Jenner Walker Hotel and Major Leroy A. Sisk, chaplain, was there and his chaplain's assistant was going home. And
[SPEAKER_00]: I just met him, and we talked. And he said, would you be interested in being a chaplain's assistant in Germany? And I told
him I would. So I got orders and transferred from Maastricht in the Netherlands to Mannheim, Germany, and was a
[SPEAKER_00]: chaplain's assistant, which was probably the best duty that any soldier could ever have. Like you said, people didn't
mess with the chaplain's assistant. No, they didn't. They did not. You helped soldiers along who had gotten Dear John
[SPEAKER_02]: letters and such like that. And it was a good humanitarian duty, which I know you liked very much. You got out of the Army in
January of 1971. You had really sort of become the spiritual leader there. After the chaplain had gone home, you came
[SPEAKER_02]: back to Texas, to Stinnett, Texas in 1971, went back to school, a little bit of time at Texas Tech, then Howard Payne, got
your teaching degree, taught for two years, but then you joined the telephone company. That's right. And you did that
[SPEAKER_02]: for 27 years. That's right. It was GTE and, of course, it was never, right? Right. But I worked with them and had a
wonderful career, worked with a lot of great people with the phone company and had a lot of good friends and a lot of great
[SPEAKER_00]: memories of working with the phone company. Right. I want to spend the time that we have left, about six and a half minutes
or so here, talking about the American Legion because you are the proud commander of the American Legion, the Earl
[SPEAKER_02]: Graham Post 159. in Bryan that serves all of the Brazos Valley. Talk a little bit about the Legion and the good work that it
does. I know one of the programs that you all are most proud of is Boys State and Girls State. Boys State and Girls State.
[SPEAKER_00]: Boys State and Girls State are magnificent programs of the American Legion. This gives students the ability to go and
function as a government. go and actually run for office in a fictitious city, in a fictitious county of a fictitious
[SPEAKER_00]: state, and they run for a particular office. Now, when they all get there, they don't know what office they wanna run for,
what office it would be, but everyone has the opportunity to run for and be elected. And this past year, Our two
[SPEAKER_00]: contestants from Bryan College Station, not only won Boys State, but they were sent to Nation, Boys Nation, in
Washington, D.C. And they were the only ones from Texas that were sent. The only ones from Texas. Both from this post.
[SPEAKER_00]: Post 1596 District. And so we're pretty happy about that, the national representatives from the state of Texas.
Indeed. I know you said that you got involved with the American Legion just about, guess what, in 2006 or 2007. One of the
[SPEAKER_02]: reasons you got involved with American Legion is you wanted to be a part of the Honor Guard. And this is something that
American Legion does and serves for people who have passed, for veterans who have passed. Talk a little bit about the
[SPEAKER_02]: Honor Guard for people that don't know what it does. Well, the Honor Guard's what brought me to the American Legion. I
believe that the service that, and I'm not speaking for myself, I'm speaking for the millions of others that have
[SPEAKER_00]: served. But when they leave this life, I believe it's altogether fitting and proper that we do military honors. And we do
that regularly in the Brazos Valley. We do often two or three times a week. And it's just the process of the 21-gun salute
[SPEAKER_00]: taps and presenting that flag to the family. Right. And so that they can place that flag in a place of prominence in their
home so that people that can come later and see that this is a home that was led by a person that served his nation. And
[SPEAKER_00]: that's what the American Legion is really all about is Americanism. We're political, but we're not partisan. But
that's the thing about the American Legion that I'm most proud of is it's all about americanism one thing that i know that
[SPEAKER_02]: you want to do and is a concern is that uh you know none of us you i anybody we're not getting any younger our world war ii
veterans are in their 80s and 90s our korean war veterans are in their 70s and and the vietnam war veterans are getting to
[SPEAKER_02]: 60 and and above and so getting younger veterans involved in american legion is something that you're striving for and
it's a it's a little bit of a challenge sometimes It is a challenge because of the generational difference between, say,
[SPEAKER_00]: the Vietnam veterans and Desert Storm. There's a long time in there. And we're going to have to adapt. The American
Legion, VFW, I'm also a life member of the DAV. We're going to have to adapt to bring those veterans inside these
[SPEAKER_00]: organizations so that they can represent the future generations that come. I'd like to say that we won't be involved in
war in the future. But that's not a fact of life. Right. Right. Exactly. Freedom's not free. And another thing that I know
[SPEAKER_02]: that you all do, and as the VFW and the DAV do, is you send packages overseas to Afghanistan monthly. Care packages or
packages with anything that the soldiers need, right? Yeah, our second commander, Jerry Heights, second vice
[SPEAKER_00]: commander Jerry Heights, has faithfully been involved in sending packages overseas. We send packages over on a
regular basis. And it's the kinds of things that soldiers need. Right. The comfort items that they don't have. You know,
[SPEAKER_00]: we got some of that in Vietnam, not very much, but I'm sure would have liked to have had it. Yes. Little things like moist
towel. Somebody sent me some of those one time, and you can't imagine the comfort of washing your face off when you
[SPEAKER_00]: haven't washed your face in a week. Especially in the conditions like you were in, in Vietnam, which the men and women
that are in Afghanistan and Iraq right now are in right now. So a little something special to eat. Just anything that they
[SPEAKER_00]: can use, we try to send. The Erogram Post, I know you all meet, what, the first Thursday of each month? First Thursday of
each month. And if you're a veteran in the Brazos Valley, We'd love to have you come. We have a happy social hour that
[SPEAKER_00]: begins at 6 o'clock, and we eat at 7, and our regular meeting is at 8, but we'd love any veteran of Brazos Valley to come, no
matter what generation. Yeah, a wonderful facility out there, and I know that you rent out the facility, too, at times.
[SPEAKER_02]: You have both indoor and a great outdoor patio with grills and cookouts and all of that, so it's a great facility that's
over there in Bryan. And it's available to the public if they would like to rent it. Indeed. You and your wife, Debbie, are
[SPEAKER_02]: very active in your retirement. I know that I wish we had time to talk about the mission trips that you all have taken to
Germany, but you remain active. But we're out of time, and I just want to thank you for your service, not only in Vietnam,
[SPEAKER_02]: but certainly now with being the commander of 159. Well, Tom, I want to thank you for what you do for the Veterans of
Bryan's Valley. It's always a pleasure. Thank you. Thank you, Gary. He served the country that he loved in Vietnam, and
[SPEAKER_02]: even though he left active service in 1971, Gary Banta continues to serve today in his retirement. He calls the American
Legion, especially the Earl Graham Post 159, unique, and it is. We salute him for his brave service in Vietnam and his
[SPEAKER_02]: service today. I'm Tom Turbyville. Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
Thank
you.